---
title: Skip Barber 3-Day Racing School
categories: [Life]
tags: [Driving]
classes: wide
header:
    image: /assets/images/skip-barber-header.png
    teaser: /assets/images/road-atlanta-with-car.jpg
---

Recently my Dad and I attended a [Skip Barber 3-Day Racing 
School](https://www.skipbarber.com/courses/3-day-racing-school/) at Road 
Atlanta in Georgia. The trip was a blast and driving on the track in a [Mustang 
GT](https://www.skipbarber.com/cars_post/mustang-gt/) was exciting. Before we 
left to go on the trip, I practiced in my Dad's simulator to get a good feel 
for the racing line around the track. I had previously done a lead follow at 
Road Atlanta in street cars, but this was my first time driving a race car, and 
my first time to drive around a track on my own. The cars were setup as race 
cars. They had a racing air intake, a racing transmission, racing brakes and 
suspension, and they had a roll cage with a five point harness. The car I used 
was number 18.

![Me practicing with racing simulator]({% link /assets/images/racing-simulator.jpg %})

At the racing school they taught us everything we would need to know to 
understand car dynamics and to drive around a track safely and quickly. Each 
day was broken up into two halves, before and after lunch. Each half then 
consisted of in-classroom learning followed by a change to put what we learned 
to test-driving the car. During the morning session of the first day we learned 
about car mass, tire load, and various types of oversteer and understeer, and 
the various causes of each. We also learned how to use our eyes to look where 
we want to go and look further down the track to plan the next move while the 
current one is being executed. The classroom lecture was quite entertaining and 
the instructor intermingled the lesson with various stories. After the 
classroom lecture, we were split up into two groups, red and blue. Each group 
had 5 people in it. They red group first went to the autocross track and 
practiced using our eyes to drive the car smoothly around the track. Cones 
where setup for the turn-in, apex, and turn-out for each of the turns. The 
instructors rode along with us and gave us advice as we navigated the autocross 
course. After that, we went to the skid pad and learned what oversteer and 
understeer feel like. We also practiced CPR (Correct, Pause, Recover) to 
prevent the car from spinning out of control when oversteer happens. I was 
actually fairly good at recovering the car, and sliding the car around was a 
blast. One of the instructors had me try to drift the car under power once I 
had succeeded in recovering the slides without throttle. Balancing the throttle 
to continue the slide made recovery much harder.

During the afternoon session day 1, we learned how to downshift with the 
toe-heel technique. We also discussed the racing line more and covered how to 
take various turns. Then we left the classroom and practiced downshifting with 
an exercise they had set up in the pit area. We also rode around the track in a 
van to learn the racing line. We had to buckle up in the van since they took it 
around the track at a good pace. After being show the track in the van, the two 
groups took turns driving in lead follow sessions with a pace car and riding in 
the pace car. After the first session the instructors stopped riding in the 
race cars and all the driving was done solo. The lead follows were fun and 
riding in the pace cars gave you a chance to hear commentary from the 
instructor and see the race line further. The last turn I took in the pace car, 
the instructor was really pushing the rental car. He was squealing the tires 
and taking all the curbs. He knocked over some cones marking the turn apex.

![Road Atlanta]({% link /assets/images/Road-Atlanta-large.jpg %})

![Road Atlanta Track Map]({% link /assets/images/road-atlanta-track-map.jpg %})

The second day, in the morning, the lecture covered more information on grip, 
turns, and flags. On the track, we did more lead follow and also took a turn 
driving the race line in the rental car with the instructor and other students 
riding along. After this, we started driving around the track solo with a stop 
box setup. We would drive around the track and then stop on the back straight 
to get feedback over the radio on how we did on the turns and if there is 
anything to focus on improving the next lap. Initially there was a low speed 
limit and rpm limit, but as we continued driving the speed limit and rpm limit 
were slowly relaxed.

In the afternoon of the second day, we discussed braking and the friction 
circle. After which, we went to the track and did braking exercises at turn 10. 
With braking you put strong initial force on the brake and then slowly release 
the force. ABS should engage or be just before engaging as your are braking. 
Then during the turn you have a slight amount of brake still applied which is 
known as trailing brake. If done correctly, your keep the tires at maximum 
traction throughout the entire turn. After the exercise, we continued to do 
stop box lapping sessions. When it was the other groups turn to drive, we would 
travel to one of the flag stations along the track and watch the other group 
drive. It was fun to see different views of the track and to critique the other 
group to learn how we could better drive when it was our turn again.

![Me at Road Atlanta with my car]({% link /assets/images/road-atlanta-with-car.jpg %})

The last day, in the morning, the lecture covered passing technique and driving 
in the rain. On the track, we drove a passing exercise at turn 10, where we 
drove off of the normal line to complete a pass. We then proceeded to do more 
stop box lapping sessions with the speed increased. 

In the afternoon, we learned how to conduct race starts. On the track, we 
practiced a real race start. We did three starts, two double file starts and 
one single file start, then transitioned into an open lapping session. The race 
starts where intimidating since you where surrounded by other cars, but the 
exercise itself wasn't that bad. You raced from when the green flag was thrown 
on the front straight away and stopped racing at the first turn. The open lap 
sessions are when the stop box is taken down, and you drive around the track 
until the checkered flag is shown. Passing is done by point by. If you see a 
car behind you, your point them by on one of the straightaways. All that means 
is your point which side of the car you want them to pass your on and then you 
slow up a little, so they can complete the pass. After we finished driving our 
last open lapping session, we were taken on a hot lap by one of the 
instructors. And let me tell you that the instructors went much faster than I 
was able to. I enjoyed going a comfortable pace around the track. After the hot 
lapping sessions, we went back to the classroom and had a graduation ceremony. 
I now have a diploma from the racing school, and I am eligible to apply for a 
SCCA racing license. More importantly, I can now participate in driving on the 
track for the [One Lap of America](http://www.onelapofamerica.com/) driving 
competition I am doing with my Dad later in the spring.

![Racing Diploma]({% link /assets/images/racing-diploma.png %})
