---
title: Reorder
categories: [Tech]
tags: [File-Organization]
header:
    image: /assets/images/reorder-header.png
    teaser: /assets/images/reorder-teaser.png
---
I recently created a [reorder](https://github.com/Geekdude/reorder) python script to rename, reorder, add, and remove files/directories in a directory with a numerical naming scheme.

A common file naming practice is to prepend a number to the filename so that the files appear in the order specified by the number. However, say you want to add, delete, or reorder these files, you would have to go through and update all the filenames which have numbers changed from the operation. Although renaming the files like this is not hard, it's annoying to do when there are multiple files which need to be renamed. I ran into this issue recently while writing my dissertation; each chapter is broken into its own `.tex` file stored in the `chapters/` directory.

    chapters
    ├── 01-introduction.tex
    ├── 02-related-work.tex
    ├── 03-previous-work.tex
    ├── 04-goals.tex
    ├── 05-tools.tex
    ├── 06-danna2-work.tex
    ├── 07-snacc.tex
    ├── 08-challenges.tex
    ├── 09-applications-performance.tex
    ├── 10-accomplishments.tex
    ├── 11-future.tex
    └── 12-conclusion.tex

In order to insert a new chapter or delete a chapter, all the files which come after that chapter will have to be renamed. Further, more in the main `.tex` file I include each of the chapters with an include statement.

    \include{chapters/01-introduction}
    \include{chapters/02-related-work}
    \include{chapters/03-previous-work}
    \include{chapters/04-goals}
    \include{chapters/05-tools}
    \include{chapters/06-danna2-work}
    \include{chapters/07-snacc}
    \include{chapters/08-challenges}
    \include{chapters/09-applications-performance}
    \include{chapters/10-accomplishments}
    \include{chapters/11-future}
    \include{chapters/12-conclusion}

This means I have to renumber the files in the directory and the files in the include statements.
In order to make this operation easier, I created a [reorder](https://github.com/Geekdude/reorder) python script to easily rename, add, delete, and reorder the `*.tex` files in the chapters directory. This script opens up a text buffer, and you make the desired changes to the buffer; then the script will make the changes to the directory and update the file numbers.

Additionally, I modified my makefile for the $$\LaTeX$$ project to include a target to build a `chapters.tex` file with the proper include statements for the chapters found in the chapters folder. Now in `main.tex` I only need to `\input{chapters.tex}`.

Now if I want to add a new chapter between previous-work and goals, as well as rename "previous work" to "prior work", all I need to do is run `reorder chapters`. I am then presented with the buffer

    01-introduction.tex
    02-related-work.tex
    03-previous-work.tex
    04-goals.tex
    05-tools.tex
    06-danna2-work.tex
    07-snacc.tex
    08-challenges.tex
    09-applications-performance.tex
    10-accomplishments.tex
    11-future.tex
    12-conclusion.tex

I then change the buffer to 

    01-introduction.tex
    02-related-work.tex
    03-prior-work.tex
    new-chapter
    04-goals.tex
    05-tools.tex
    06-danna2-work.tex
    07-snacc.tex
    08-challenges.tex
    09-applications-performance.tex
    10-accomplishments.tex
    11-future.tex
    12-conclusion.tex

Then I can rebuild the $$\LaTeX$$ document and the changes to the chapters will be included with a newly generated `chapters.tex`.

Much appreciation to Jonathan Ambrose who helped come up with the idea for the script, motivated me to write it, and who added many additional features to the script.
